---
layout: post
title: "C++26 Reflection gives us universal template parameters"
date: 2026-06-07 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  class-template-argument-deduction
  paradigm-shift
  ranges
  reflection
  templates
---

Keenan Horrigan on the std-proposals mailing list [pointed out](https://lists.isocpp.org/std-proposals/2026/06/18544.php)
an interesting consequence of C++26 Reflection: it seems to give us "universal template parameters"
almost for free.

The STL sometimes tries to pretend we have "universal template parameters" by overloading templates
with the same name. For example, we have both `std::get<T>(tp)` taking a type and `std::get<I>(tp)`
taking an integer; but these are just two completely different signatures of `std::get` in the same overload
set. Likewise in C++23 you can write either `rg | ranges::to<std::vector<int>>()` (where the argument to
`to` is a type) or `rg | ranges::to<std::vector>()` (where the argument is a class template).
Again this is accomplished with an overload set — roughly like this (modulo I've totally mangled
the actual job of `ranges::to`, which is generally _not_ to forward its arguments to `To`’s constructor):

    template<class To, class... Args>  // #1
    auto rangish_to(Args&&... args) {
      return To(std::forward<Args>(args)...);
    }
    template<template<class...> class To, class... Args>  // #2
    auto rangish_to(Args&&... args) {
      return To(std::forward<Args>(args)...);
    }

    int *a, *b;
    auto x = rangish_to<std::vector<int>>(a, b);      // OK, #1
    auto y = rangish_to<std::vector>(a, b);           // OK, #2

But even this overload set won't accept a caller like:

    auto z = rangish_to<std::ranges::subrange>(a, b); // error

because `std::ranges::subrange` as a template argument matches neither `class To` nor
`template<class...> class To`. It's actually a class template of two type parameters and a constant!
([cppreference.](https://en.cppreference.com/cpp/ranges/subrange))

    enum class subrange_kind : bool {
      unsized,
      sized,
    };
    template<
      input_or_output_iterator I,
      sentinel_for<I> S = I,
      subrange_kind K = sized_sentinel_for<S, I> ? sized : unsized>
    class subrange { ~~~~ };

We could accept `subrange` ad-hoc via a third overload:

    template<template<class,class,auto> class To, class... Args>  // #3
    auto rangish_to(Args&&... args) {
      return To(std::forward<Args>(args)...);
    }

but in general there's no way to write out the set of _all possible_ kinds of
class templates, so we can't make our `rangish_to` accept all of them.

> You might point out that the real `ranges::to` wouldn't accept `subrange` anyway, because the real
> `ranges::to` accepts only containers like `vector`, not views like `subrange` or `span`. However,
> this deficiency is likely to be [DR'ed](/blog/2019/08/02/the-tough-guide-to-cpp-acronyms/#dr)
> in the near future thanks to Hewill Kang's well-received
> [P3544 "`ranges::to<view>`."](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p3544r0.html)

C++26 Reflection to the rescue! C++26 Reflection is "untyped": it uses
[a single type](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p2996r13.html#why-a-single-opaque-reflection-type)
`std::meta::info` to represent the reflections of every kind of thing
in the language. Therefore a template parameter of type `meta::info` alone can represent
`std::vector`, `std::ranges::subrange`, `std::array`, or anything else (`std::vector<int>`,
`size_t`, `42`, `std::ignore`...) and so we can write a single function template like this
([Godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/czYzKEczT)):

    template<std::meta::info To, class... Args>
    auto meta_to(Args&&... args) {
      return typename [:To:](std::forward<Args>(args)...);
    }

    auto x = meta_to<^^std::vector<int>>(a, b);      // OK
    auto y = meta_to<^^std::vector>(a, b);           // OK
    auto z = meta_to<^^std::ranges::subrange>(a, b); // OK!

For the cost of two characters `^^` (and a really cryptic error message if you forget
the `typename` keyword), C++26 seems to have given us universal template parameters!

(Does this mean [P2989 "Universal template parameters"](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2024/p2989r2.pdf)
is obsolete? IMHO, yes. But I can see how one might debate it: those two `^^` characters
_are_ kind of ugly.)
